\chapter*{Preface}

This book is in principle the second edition of the book Hotz/Walter:
''Automatentheorie und Formale Sprachen II, Endliche Automaten'' (engl.\
''Automata theory and formal languages II, finite automata''), Bibliographisches
Institut, Mannheim, 1969.

The book however has been reworked so extensively that it really can count as
completely new. While in the first edition only the theory of finite automata
had been treated, in this edition also an introduction into the theory of
context-free languages is given. This was only possible in the available space
by developing the theory in an automata-theoretic way.

Composing the theory in such a way had already been proposed by Goldstine in
1977 \cite{Goldstine77} and sketched by him in various talks. The motivation for
developing my lecture from which this book originates in that way is however not
based on Goldstine's idea.

The composition here arose almost automatically out of dealing with the works of
the French school\footnote{{\em ''French school''} refers to the works of
Sch端tzenberger, Nivat, Perrot, Berstel, Sakarovitch etc. Berstel's book on
transductions which is cited very often in the literature was based on lectures 
of Berstel in Paris and also in Saarbr端cken where he spent some months in 1978
on invitation of Hotz.}.
I must emphasize here the book by Jean Berstel on transductions \cite{Berstel79}. Mr.\ Berstel finally pointed me to the work of
Goldstine. I fully support Goldstine's opinion that it would be worth rethinking
the whole theory of formal languages along these automata-theoretic lines.

This book is only an introduction into the theory of formal languages. The
interested reader who wants to gets a deeper understanding of the theory or who
wants to get a different look into it is pointed to the books by Ginsburg,
Harrison or Salomaa. Relations to applications can be found in books on compiler
design.

Dr.\ Klaus Estenfeld worked out my lecture ''Formal Languages I'', which I gave
on this topic in the winter of 1980/81, as the foundation of this book and made
additions at some places.

Dipl.-Math.\ Bernd Becker carefully read the manuscript and contributed with his
proposals to the success of this book.

The publisher as well as the editors of the series earn our thanks for their
patience of waiting for this second edition.

\bigskip
Saarbr端cken, August 1981 \hfill {\em G端nter Hotz}
